Adds README for code generation (#178)
amazon-ion/ion-cli: src/bin/ion/commands/generate/README.md

# Ion Code Generator User Guide

This guide introduces code generation using the `ion-cli` tool. The `generate` subcommand in `ion-cli` takes Ion Schema
Language (ISL) files as input and produces code based on the types defined in these schemas for both Java and Rust
programming languages.

This guide assumes the reader has a basic understanding of
the [Ion Schema Language](https://amazon-ion.github.io/ion-schema/docs/isl-2-0/spec).

This guide covers

1. [Installing ion-cli](#installing-ion-cli)
2. [Defining a Data Model](#defining-a-data-model)
3. [Running the generator](#running-the-generator)
4. [Using the generated code in a Java project](#using-the-generated-code-in-a-java-project)
5. [Using the generated code in a Rust project](#using-the-generated-code-in-a-rust-project)

## Installing `ion-cli`

### Install using `brew` (Mac only)

The easiest way to install the `ion-cli` is via [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/).
Once the `brew` command is available, run:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

brew tap amazon-ion/ion-cli
brew install ion-cli
```

### Install using `cargo`

The `ion-cli` can also be installed by using Rust's package manager, `cargo`. If you don't already have `cargo`, you can
install it by visiting [rustup.rs](https://rustup.rs/).
To install `ion-cli`, run the following command:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

using the `element` constraint.

To define a new type that is a homogeneous list, create a top-level type with an `element` constraint.

**Example**

```
$ion_schema_2_0

type::{
  name: product_tags,
  type: list,
  element: string,
}

type::{
  name: product_summary,
  fields: closed::{
    product_id: int,
    name: string,
    
    // The type of the `tags` field is the new type `product_tags`
    tags: product_tags,
    
    // The type of the `ratings` field is a list of integers
    ratings: { type: list, element: int },
  }
}
```

### Defining an enumeration

Enumerations are defined using `valid_values` constraint which contains only symbol values.

```
$ion_schema_2_0
type::{
   name: fruits,
   valid_values: [apple, banana, strawberry]
}
```

### Special considerations for inline types

Inline types in Ion Schema do not have a corresponding name for it. Here’s how the inline types are defined in ISL:

```
<INLINE_TYPE_DEFINITION> ::= { <CONSTRAINT>... }
```

For more information on inline types in Ion Schema,
see [Type Definitions](https://amazon-ion.github.io/ion-schema/docs/isl-2-0/spec#type-definitions).

> Since these inline types do not have name attached to it, code generator interprets the name of this inline type based

Reviewer: The grammatical number does not match here. Try one of these instead.

> Since an inline type does not have a name attached to it...

or

> Since these inline types do not have names attached to them...

on where its placed in the schema. Below are few cases on how code generator interprets the name for the generated data
model for an inline type in ISL:

##### Inline type within `fields` constraint

If the inline type is defined inside a `fields` constraint then code generator uses the field name to generate the
inline type.
Inline types in a `fields` constraint should be named after their respective field names.
e.g.  **ISL:**

```
$ion_schema_2_0
type::{
   name: Foo,
  fields: closed::{
     // The inline type will be named `bar`, corresponding to the field name
     bar: { fields: { baz: string } }
  }
}
```

#### Inline type within `element` constraint:

If the inline type is defined inside `element` constraint then code generator gives it a static name `Element` which
will be used by its parent typed list.
e.g. **ISL:**

```
$ion_schema_2_0
type::{
   name: Foo,
   // The inline type here will be called "element"
   element: { fields: { bar: string } },
   type: list
}
```

## Running the generator

Use the `generate` subcommand with the following syntax:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

ion -X generate [OPTIONS] --language <language> --authority <directory>
```

Required options:

* `--language` or `-l`: Specify the target programming language (java or rust)

> * `-A`, `—authority`: The root(s) of the file system authority(s). Authorities are only required if your schema needs to
>   import a type from another schema or if you are loading a schema using the —id option. (For more information what is

Reviewer: An authority is always required by the `generate` command.
```suggestion
* `-A`, `—authority`: The root(s) of the file system authority(s). (For more information what is
```

  an authority,
  see [Ion Schema Specification](https://amazon-ion.github.io/ion-schema/docs/isl-1-0/spec#schema-authorities))
* `--namespace` or `-n`: Provide a namespace for generated Java code (e.g., `org.example`)

Additional options:

* `--output` or `-o`: Specify the output directory for generated code (default: current directory)

Example:

```
ion -X generate -l java -n org.example -A ./schema -o ./generated/java
```

If you are looking to run the code generator at build time, follow this guide on adding code generation
to [build process in Java](#adding-to-the-build-process)
and [build process in Rust](#adding-to-the-build-process-1).

> This repository also contains an [example](https://github.com/amazon-ion/ion-cli/tree/main/code-gen-projects) Gradle and
> Rust project to showcase how to use cod generator at build time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This repository also contains [examples](https://github.com/amazon-ion/ion-cli/tree/main/code-gen-projects) of how to use the code generator in Java and Rust projects.
```

## Using the generated code in a Java project

### Adding to the build process

> ##### **Using Gradle**

Reviewer: We don't need this heading since we don't have to distinguish between gradle instructions and e.g. maven instructions.

```suggestion
```

To generate code as part of the build process of a project, define a Gradle build task inside `build.gradle.kts` or
`build.gradle` .
The generated code requires a dependency to `ion-java` version `1.11.9` .
Following is a sample build task defined in `build.gradle.kts` that you can add in an existing Gradle project to
generate code for your schemas:

> ```

Reviewer: To get syntax highlighting:
```suggestion
```kotlin
```

Generated type has a `readFrom` method which can be used to read Ion data using an `IonReader` and initialize the
generated type with the given Ion data. *(Generated code here depends on `ion-java` version `1.11.9`)*

```
// asssume that the generated type is `Foo`
IonReaderBuilder readerBuilder = IonReaderBuilder.standard();
try (IonReader reader = readerBuilder.build(bufferedStream)) {
    reader.next();
    Foo foo = Foo.readFrom(reader);
}
```

### Write a generated type to an `IonWriter`

Generated type has a `writeTo` method which can be used to write the type as Ion using an `IonWriter` . *(Generated code
here depends on `ion-java` version `1.11.9`)*

```
// asssume that the generated type is initialized as `foo`
IonWriter writer = b.build(out);
foo.writeTo(writer);
writer.close();
```

## Using the generated code in a Rust project

### Adding to the build process

To generate code as part of the build process of a Cargo project, define a cargo build script in `build.rs`.
The generated code requires a dependency to `ion-rs` version `1.0.0-rc.2` .
Following is sample build script you can add in your existing Cargo project to generate code using `ion-cli`:

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```rust
```

| `lob`	       | 🟡	                            | 🟡	                     | 	                                                                        |
| `text`	      | 🟡	                            | 🟡	                     | 	                                                                        |
| `number`	    | 🟡	                            | 🟡	                     | 	                                                                        |
| `any`	       | ❌	                             | ❌	                      | 	                                                                        |

The built-in types starting with `$` are not currently planned to be supported.
The `struct` built-in type may have additional support for generating maps with string keys in future.

## Appendix B - Examples of generated code based on ISL type definitions in Java

Here are some examples on generated code for ISL type definitions:

*Note: generated code here was trimmed to represent only the portion of code necessary for this example. Each generated
data model will have its builder, getters, setters, readFrom(which read Ion data to the model) and writeTo(which writes

> the model as Ion data) are defined.
> 
> *

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the model as Ion data) are defined.*
```

#### Generating classes

**Ion Schema:**

```
type::{
    // this will be used as the name of the generated class
    name: person,
    // currently code generation doesn't allow open ended types,
    // so for defining a `type` constraint is required
    type: struct, 
    fields:{
        first_name: string,
        last_name: string,
        age: int,
    }
}
```

**Generated Code in Java:**

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java
```

     */
    public static Person readFrom(IonReader reader) {
        // ...
    }
    
    /**
     * Writes a Person as Ion from an {@link IonWriter}.
     *
     * This method does not close the writer after writing is complete.
     * The caller is responsible for closing the stream associated with the writer.
     * This method skips writing a field when it's null.
     */
    public void writeTo(IonWriter writer) throws IOException {
        // ...
    }
}
```

#### Generating nested classes

**Ion Schema:**

```
type::{
    // this will be used as the name of the generated class
    name: customer,
    // currently code generation doesn't allow open ended types,
    // so for defining a `type` constraint is required
    type: struct, 
    fields:{
        name: string,
        // this nested struct will be generated as nested class in the generated code
        address:{
            type: struct,
            fields: {
                street: string,
                city: string,
                state: string,
                postal_code: string
           }
         }
    }
}
```

**Generated code in Java:**

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java
```

 class Customer {
    private org.example.Customer.Address address;
    private String name;
     ...
    static class Address {
        private String state;
        private String city;
        private String street;
        private String postalCode;
        ...
    }
}
```

#### Generating enum

**Ion Schema:**

```
type::{
    // this will be used as the name of the generated enum
    name: fruits,
    type: symbol,
    // currently only symbol values are supported `valid_values` 
    // for enum generation
    valid_values: [apple, banana, mango]
}
```

**Generated code in Java:**

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```java
```

    APPLE("apple"),
    BANANA("banana"),
    MANGO("mango"),
    ;
     ...
     
    public static Fruits readFrom(IonReader reader) {
        // ...
    }
    
    public void writeTo(IonWriter writer) throws IOException {
        // ...
    }
}
```

## Appendix C - Supported Schema Features

Currently, code generation supports basic ISL constraints:

* Supported constraints: type, element, fields (including inline type definitions), valid_values (with symbol values)
* Supported data models: class, enum, typed list, scalar
* Supports imports
* Supports variably occurring types (`optional` or `required`) within `fields` constraint

Limitations:

* Heterogeneous lists not supported (e.g., `{type: list}` without an `element` constraint)
* Discriminated union types (e.g., types with `one_of`) are not supported
* `struct`s with arbitrary field names are not supported
* Optional fields are not supported when targeting
  Rust ([ion-cli#102](https://github.com/amazon-ion/ion-cli/issues/102))
* Built-in Ion Schema types `timestamp`, `decimal`, `text`, `lob`, `number`, and `document` are not yet
  supported ([ion-cli#173](https://github.com/amazon-ion/ion-cli/issues/173)

> * * *

Reviewer: Unnecessary formatting at end of doc.
```suggestion
```

Generated type has a `readFrom` method which can be used to read Ion data using `Reader` and initialize the generated
type with the given Ion data. *(Generated code here depends on `ion-rs` version `1.0.0-rc.2`)*

```rust
let mut reader: Reader = ReaderBuilder::new().build(ION_DATA) ?;
reader.next() ?;

> let foo: Foo = Foo::read_from( & mut reader) ?;

Reviewer: Any particular reason for the added spaces here?

Author: huh. I removed those spaces. I think its getting formatted because I added `rust` syntax highlighting and this code block does not really contain a main. I will just remove the highlight I think.
